[Music]
wow humans can distinguish between more
than one trillion
cents and each person has a unique odor
tell me about it ah just kidding this
ain't smell-o-vision
but have you ever wondered how this
sense is possible well
let's uh sniff around and find out
imagine you're eating a freshly baked
cookie
[Music]
not only does it smell good but it
tastes delicious
as it crumbles in your mouth it starts
to release little molecules
these travel through the back of your
throat while some of them make their way
into your nose now picture yourself
walking into a room with a vanilla
scented candle
you identify the musky smell through a
process called diffusion
air and odor molecules spread freely in
all directions
until they reach your nose let me
shrink myself down to the size of an
odor molecule
and i'll show you how it works as you
take a deep breath
i'll enter through your nose the first
organ of your respiratory system careful
don't trip on the boogers
can you see those thick little hairs
inside your nostrils
those act as security guards and they're
as thick as the follicles on your head
their job is to stop dust debris germs
and
other particles from getting into your
lungs
the shiny stuff on the edges of the
hairs is mucus
no it's not yes it is it traps the
unwelcome particles that show up in your
nose
it also keeps the lining of your nose
moist because the skin there is very
sensitive
and needs constant hydration
uh-oh watch out sometimes i have to
dodge these big
fleshy things that occasionally invade
here
but not to worry these are called
fingers
and they're only interested in mining
for the boogers
further in there are some tiny hairs
called the cilia
but you can only see them through a
microscope they're another defense
mechanism in your system
you've also got these in your ears and
other parts of your body
when unwelcome visitors get trapped the
cilia move
back and forth to push the mucus out of
the way
they send it to either the back of your
throat or to the front of your nose
finally we have some room ah
this huge chamber is the nasal
[Music]
it goes all the way to the upper back of
your throat
its job is to filter moisturize and warm
up the air you inhale
can you see those three extended pieces
on the wall of your nasal cavity
that look like small hot dogs those are
the turbinate
and you've got three in each nostril the
first turbinate is the first tissue to
meet the outside air
oxygen molecules will go down that slide
that leads to your lungs
but we're heading the other way some
odor molecules go into your lungs too
but they come right out when you exhale
look up at that thin layer of mucus
that's where we're headed
right underneath the mucus you've got
more cilia
and then there's the olfactory
epithelium this is a very special tissue
lying on the roof of your nasal chamber
[Music]
think of it as a block of soft squishy
sponges
that contains a lot of important things
like the smell detectors leading to your
brain
oh look there are some teeny tiny things
branching out like little plant roots
those are the dendrite and they're
extensions of your nerve cells
you've got around 8 million neurons in
each nostril
let's squeeze through and see what's
going on further in
ah here we are these round little
guys that look like small cherry seeds
are your smell receptors
and they're supported by other cells
like a bunch of pillows placed between
glass spheres to keep them in place
each of them is sensitive to a group of
smells
i'll bind myself to one that's sensitive
to my smell
just like a piece of puzzle fitting into
place
the moment the receptor cell picks me up
it triggers a series of events
the receptor is now firing an electric
signal
through a thin tube called the axon
let's follow it and see where it goes
we're now
passing through a connective tissue that
has olfactory glands
these are responsible for producing the
mucus in your nose that we just swam
through knock knock
that feels like a hard shell it's called
the crib reform plate
and it separates your brain from your
nasal cavity
it's got little holes in it to allow the
nerves that pick up smells to go through
as we move upwards the nerves are
starting to connect into bundles
squeezing through one of the holes in
the plate we see a bunch of them going
further in
oh wow look at that those bundles of
nerve connect to a little ball
that's the glomerulus it received the
input from the little receptor cells
and it will process it further even
though it receives
smell data from one receptor it can
detect multiple smells
you've got around 1800 of those spheres
extending above each nostril
and they're all located on top of the
bony plate we've just squeezed through
now we're in the outward extension of
the brain that sits right above your
nasal cavity
it looks like a bulb which is why it's
called the olfactory bulb
we've got a long road ahead of us the
little processing spheres are now
extending to something called the mitral
cells
these are neurons and they look like
little spiders with very long legs
extending on each side let's move
further into the bulb
to the olfactory tract and then inside
the brain
the bulb is part of the limbic system
this is a large network of structures
close to the middle of the brain
that connects to the central nervous
system brain cells carry the information
to a small
area in your brain called the amygdala
that's where you process your emotions
stop it okay it's also the area that
activates your fight or flight response
then the signals go to the hippocampus
the place where you make memories
process emotions and learn stuff next
stop
the thalamus which sends some of the
smell information to the orbital frontal
cortex
to connect it with your taste
information
smell is the only sensation that travels
directly to the emotional
part of your head other senses
such as sight and sound first go to the
thalamus
this acts as a relay center in the
middle of the cerebral hemisphere
and it sends the data to other regions
of the brain
but our sense of smell works in
mysterious ways
when you haven't eaten for some time
your body produces a hormone called
garland that hormone sends a signal to
your brain
hey you need energy buddy i can't find
anything in your stomach
your brain responds by making you hungry
the same hormone activates some
receptors which trigger the little smell
bulb we traveled through earlier
this gives you a heightened sense of
smell to improve your chances of finding
food
now imagine you're in a store and
someone sprays some perfume on a piece
of paper
you lean in to sniff it and close your
eyes
that action works like an elimination
process where you remove one of your
senses to heighten the other ones
it's like when people turn down the
radio in their cars when they're lost or
trying to concentrate when you have a
cold
you lose your sense of smell that's
called anosmia
or smell blindness and because the roof
of your throat connects to your nose
when you chew on food aromas are
released and activate your smell
receptors
with a stuffed nose the smell molecules
from the food can't reach the sensory
cells
they can't make their way to the
thalamus to connect your sense of taste
this is why everything seems tasteless
everyone smells the world using
different receptors
and some scientists believe that every
individual has at least
one odor that they can't detect it could
be
vanilla garlic menthol coffee or even
certain kinds of fruit have you ever
sniffed some
spicy peppers that made you cough
a few years ago scientists discovered
that the lungs have some odor receptors
too
but instead of sending the spicy scent
to your brain they give you a signal to
cough
quite amazing isn't it who else knows
what the nose knows
your toes well maybe on some future
video
bye-bye